---
layout: post
title:  "Structure From Motion"
permalink: /sfm/
excerpt: "Deriving bundle adjustment"
mathjax: true
date:   2018-12-27 11:00:00
mathjax: true

---
Table of Contents:
- [A Basic SfM Pipeline](#sfmpipeline)
- [Cost Functions](#costfunctions)
- [Bundle Adjustment](#bundleadjustment)

<a name='sfmpipeline'></a>


## Epipolar Geometry

1993 Luong non-linear least squares

## A Basic Structure-from-Motion (SFM) Pipeline

As described in [1], there are generally four steps to the algorithm:
- (1) Find interest points in each image
- (2) Find candidate correspondences (match descriptors for each interest point)
- (3) Perform geometric verification of correspondences (RANSAC + fundamental matrix)
- (4) Solve for 3D points and camera that minimize reprojection error.

<a name='costfunctions'></a>

## Cost Functions/Error Modelling

The choice of cost function quantifies the total prediction error of the model. It measures how well the model fits the observations and background knowledge.

### Reprojection Error for a Single Keypoint in Two Images

Imagine we have matched two keypoints, $$x_1,x_2$$ in two different images $$I_1,I_2$$ via a SIFT-like feature matching pipeline. We are viewing the projection of the same 3D point $$\mathbf{X}$$ in both images. We now wish to identify the coordinates describing the location of $$\mathbf{X}$$.

If image $$I_1$$ was captured with projection matrix $$M_1$$, and image $$I_2$$ was captured with projection matrix $$M_2$$, we can enforce that the 3D point $$\mathbf{X}$$ is projected into the image into the right location in both images. This is called *triangulation*.

If the camera calibration determining $$M_1,M_2$$ are **known**, then the optimization problem for a single matched keypoint in two images becomes:

$$
\min_{\mathbf{X}} f(\mathbf{X}) = \| x_1 - Proj(\mathbf{X},M_1)\|^2 + \| x_2 - Proj(\mathbf{X},M_2)\|^2 
$$

### Reprojection Error for Many Keypoints in Many Cameras

Imagine now that we have $$m$$ different cameras, and each camera has a **known** projection matrix $$\{M_i\}_{i=1}^m$$. Suppose we match $$n$$ different keypoints across the images, denoted $$\{\mathbf{X}_j\}_{j=1}^n$$.

The optimization problem becomes:

$$
\min_{\mathbf{X}_1,\mathbf{X}_2, \dots} \sum\limits_{i=1}^m \sum\limits_{j=1}^n \| x_{ij} - Proj(\mathbf{X_j},M_i)\|^2 
$$

In this case $$x_{ij}$$ is the observed location of the $$j$$'th keypoint into the $$i$$'th image, as discovered by a keypoint detector in the SIFT-like pipeline. We penalize solutions for $$\mathbf{X}_1,\mathbf{X}_2,\dots$$ in which $$x_{ij}$$ is not very close to $$Proj(\mathbf{X_j},M_i)$$.

<a name='bundleadjustment'></a>

## Bundle Adjustment

Imagine now that we are working with arbitrary images for which we have no calibration information. Thus, the projection matrices $$\{M_i\}_{i=1}^m$$ are **unknown**.

Bundle adjustment is the process of minimizing reprojection error over (1) multiple 3D points and (2) multiple cameras. Triggs *et al.* define it as *"the problem of refining a visual reconstruction to produce jointly optimal structure and viewing parameter estimates"* [2]. The optimization problem changes only by adding new, additional variables for which we solve.

$$
\min_{\mathbf{X}_1,\mathbf{X}_2, \dots, M_1,M_2,\dots} \sum\limits_{i=1}^m \sum\limits_{j=1}^n \| x_{ij} - Proj(\mathbf{X_j},M_i)\|^2 
$$

According to [2], the name "Bundle Adjustment" refers to *bundles* of light rays leaving each 3D point and converging on each camera center, *"which are ‘adjusted’ optimally with respect to both feature and camera positions"*.

## Gauss-Newton

Gauss-Newton is generally preferred to Second Order methods like Newton's Method for a simple reason: deriving and implementing calculations of the second derivatives of the projection model $$Proj(X_j,M_i)$$ is difficult and error-prone [2].

For example, the seminal work in SfM, "Building Rome in a Day" [3] uses Trust-Region Gauss-Newton optimization (Levenberg-Marquardt) that chooses between a truncated and an exact step Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm.

<!-- ## Network Graph  shows which features are seen in which images, -->

## Exploiting Sparsity

Those who use generic optimization routines to solve SfM problems will find the optimization slow. This would be unwise, however, since the problem sparsity can be exploited.


## Bundler

[6] 

## COLMAP


## Rotation Averaging

 R. Hartley, J. Trumpf, Y. Dai, and H. Li. Rotation Averaging.
IJCV, 103(3):267–305, 2013

http://users.cecs.anu.edu.au/~hongdong/rotationaveraging.pdf

2 cos(|α|) = trace(R
−1
gt Rest)−1, i.e., we measure the minimum rotation angle required to align both rotations


MRF scheme. Rotation Averaging slow.

## Schur Complement

Hessian matrix H in bundle adjustment has a unique structure: Hcc and Hpp are sparse matrices with only diagonal
elements in block units, whereas Hcp is a dense matrix. Efficient solutions that focus on this unique structure are the
keys to developing highly precise and robust visual SLAM.
State-of-the-art monocular SLAM methods, such as
ORB-SLAM[21] and DSO[6], solve Equation 7 by decomposing it using the Schur complement matrix instead of directly solving it. (VITAMIN-E)

## References
[1] Ramanan, Deva. *Structure from Motion.* [http://16720.courses.cs.cmu.edu/lec/sfm.pdf](http://16720.courses.cs.cmu.edu/lec/sfm.pdf).

[2] Bill Triggs, Philip McLauchlan, Richard Hartley and Andrew Fitzgibbon. *Bundle Adjustment — A Modern Synthesis*. [https://hal.inria.fr/inria-00548290/document](https://hal.inria.fr/inria-00548290/document).

[3] Sameer Agarwal, Noah Snavely, Ian Simon, Steven M. Seitz, Richard Szeliski. *Building Rome in a Day*. Communications of the ACM,Volume 54 Issue 10, October 2011. Pages 105-112. [https://grail.cs.washington.edu/rome/rome_paper.pdf](https://grail.cs.washington.edu/rome/rome_paper.pdf).

[4] Luong, Q.-T. and Faugeras, O.: 1993, Determining the fundamental matrix with planes: instability and new algorithms, Proc. IEEE Conf. Comp. Vision Patt. Recog., New York City, NY, pp. 489{494. 

[5] Luong, Q.-T., Deriche, R., Faugeras, O. and Papadopoulo, T.: 1993, On determining the fundamental matrix: analysis of di erent methods and experimental results, Technical Report 1894, INRIA SophiaAntipolis. [PDF](https://hal.inria.fr/inria-00074777/document).

[6] N. Snavely, S. Seitz, and R. Szeliski. Modeling the world from internet photo collections. IJCV, 80(2):189–210, 2008.

[7] Christopher Zach. Robust Bundle Adjustment Revisited. [PDF](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007%2F978-3-319-10602-1_50.pdf).

[8] Frank Dellaert. [Notes](http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~kaess/vslam_cvpr14/media/VSLAM-Tutorial-CVPR14-A13-BundleAdjustment-handout.pdf). Slides](http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~kaess/vslam_cvpr14/media/VSLAM-Tutorial-CVPR14-A13-BundleAdjustment.pdf)

